[MRG] Alignment methods benchmarking example and documentation (#31)
Parietal-INRIA/fmralign: source/functional_alignment/fmralign_pipeline.rst

between images of two or several subjects in order to match voxels which have \
similar profile of activation. This section explains how this transform
is found in fmralign to make the process easy, efficient and scalable.

We compare various methods of alignment on a pairwise alignment problem for `Individual Brain Charting <https://project.inria.fr/IBC/>`_ subjects. For each subject, we have a lot of functional informations in the form of several task-based contrast per subject. We will just work here on a ROI.

.. contents:: **Contents**
    :local:
    :depth: 1

Local functional alignment
==================================

.. figure:: ../images/alignment_pipeline.png
   :scale: 25
   :align: right

Aligning images of various size is not always easy because when we search a \
transformation for `n` voxels yields at least a complexity of :math:`n^2`. Moreover, \
finding just one transformation for similarity of functional signal in the whole \
brain could create unrealistic correspondances, for example inter-hemispheric.

To avoid these issues, we keep alignment local, i.e. on local and functionally meaningful regions. \

> Thus, in a first step cluster the voxels in the image into `n_pieces` regions, based on functional information. \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus, in a first step cluster the voxels in the image into `n_pieces` sub-regions, based on functional information. \
```

between the source subject data `X` and the target data `Y`. `X` and `Y` are arrays of
dimensions `(n_voxels, n_samples)` where each image is a sample.
So we can see each signal as a distribution where each voxel as a point
in a multidimensional functional space (each dimension is a sample).

We show below a 2D example, with 2 distributions: `X` in green, `Y` in red. Both have 20 voxels (points) characterized by 2 samples (images). And the alignment we search for is the matching of both distibutions, optimally in some sense.

.. figure:: ../auto_examples/images/sphx_glr_plot_alignment_simulated_2D_data_001.png
   :align: left

Orthogonal alignment (Procrustes)
----------------------------------
The first idea proposed in Haxby, 2011 was to compute an orthogonal mixing
matrix `R` and a scaling `sc` such that Frobenius norm :math:`||sc RX - Y||^2` is minimized.

.. figure:: ../auto_examples/images/sphx_glr_plot_alignment_simulated_2D_data_003.png
   :align: left

.. figure:: ../auto_examples/images/sphx_glr_plot_alignment_simulated_2D_data_004.png
   :align: left

Ridge alignment
----------------------------------

> Another simple idea to regularize the transform `R` searched for is to penalize it's L2 norm. This is a ridge regression, which means we search `R` such that Frobenius  norm :math:`|| XR - Y ||^2 + alpha * ||R||^2` is minimized with cross-validation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another simple idea to regularize the transform `R` searched for is to penalize its L2 norm. This is a ridge regression, which means we search `R` such that Frobenius  norm :math:`|| XR - Y ||^2 + alpha * ||R||^2` is minimized with cross-validation.
```

The training fold, used to learn alignment from source subject toward target:
  * source train: AP contrasts for subject 'sub-01'
  * target train: AP contrasts for subject 'sub-02'

>>> source_train = df[df.subject == 'sub-01'][df.acquisition == 'ap'].path.values
>>> target_train = df[df.subject == 'sub-02'][df.acquisition == 'ap'].path.values

The testing fold:
  * source test: PA contrasts for subject 'sub-01', used to predict \
    the corresponding contrasts of subject 'sub-02'
  * target test: PA contrasts for subject 'sub-02', used as a ground truth \
    to score our predictions

>>> source_test = df[df.subject == 'sub-01'][df.acquisition == 'pa'].path.values
>>> target_test = df[df.subject == 'sub-02'][df.acquisition == 'pa'].path.values

Define the estimators, fit them and do a prediction
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To proceed with alignment we use the class PairwiseAlignment with the masker we created before.

First we choose a suitable number of regions such that each regions is approximately 200 voxels wide.

>>> n_voxels = roi_masker.mask_img_.get_data().sum()
>>> n_pieces = np.round(n_voxels / 200)

> Then for each method we define the estimator fit it, and predict new image. We then plot

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then for each method we define the estimator, fit it, and predict new image. We then plot
```

.. topic:: **Full code example**
   The documentation here just gives the big idea. A full code example can be found on
   :ref:`sphx_glr_auto_examples_plot_pairwise_alignment.py`. If you want to work on a
   Region Of Interest see :ref:`sphx_glr_auto_examples_plot_pairwise_roi_alignment.py`.

.. contents:: **Contents**
    :local:
    :depth: 1

Local functional alignment
==================================

.. figure:: ../images/alignment_pipeline.png
   :scale: 25
   :align: right

Aligning images of various size is not always easy because when we search a \
transformation for `n` voxels yields at least a complexity of :math:`n^2`. Moreover, \
finding just one transformation for similarity of functional signal in the whole \
brain could create unrealistic correspondances, for example inter-hemispheric.

To avoid these issues, we keep alignment local, i.e. on local and functionally meaningful regions. \

> Thus, in a first step we realize a functional clustering of the voxels in the image into `n_pieces` regions. \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus, in a first step cluster the voxels in the image into `n_pieces` regions, based on functional information. \
```

   :scale: 24
   :align: left

   Orthogonal mixing matrix

Ridge alignment
----------------------------------
Another simple idea to regularize the transform `R` searched for is to penalize it's L2 norm. This is a ridge regression, which means we search `R` such that Frobenius  norm :math:`|| XR - Y ||^2 + alpha * ||R||^2` is minimized with cross-validation.

.. figure:: ../images/Ridge_transport.png
   :scale: 20
   :align: left

   Ridge alignment

.. figure:: ../images/Ridge_mix.png
  :scale: 24
  :align: left

   Ridge mixing matrix

Optimal Transport alignment
----------------------------------
Finally this package comes with a new method that build on the Wasserstein distance which is well-suited for this problem. This is the framework of Optimal Transport that search to transport all signal from `X` to `Y`
while minimizign the overall cost of this transport. `R` is here the optimal coupling between `X` and `Y` with entropic regularization.

.. figure:: ../images/OT_transport.png
   :scale: 20
   :align: left

   Optimal transport alignment

.. figure:: ../images/OT_mix.png
  :scale: 24
  :align: left

   Optimal transport mixing matrix

> 

Reviewer: How more costly is it to generate all these from data (creating a dedicated example) ? This would be so much more convincing !

Author: I did it, it costed few hours.

Reviewer: Sorry for that. But these figures are so great for pedagogic purpose that it's much better to reproduce them !

=================================================

Now let's compare the performance of these various methods on our simple example:
the prediction of left-out data for a new subject from another subjects data.

Loading the data
------------------------------
We begin with the retrieval of images from two `Individual Brain Charting <https://project.inria.fr/IBC/>`_ subjects :

>>> from fmralign.fetch_example_data import fetch_ibc_subjects_contrasts
>>> files, df, mask = fetch_ibc_subjects_contrasts(['sub-01', 'sub-02'])

Here `files` is the list of paths for each subject and `df` is a pandas Dataframe
with metadata about each of them.

Extract a mask for the visual cortex from Yeo Atlas
----------------------------------------------------

>>> from nilearn import datasets, plotting
>>> from nilearn.image import resample_to_img, load_img, new_img_like
>>> atlas_yeo_2011 = datasets.fetch_atlas_yeo_2011()
>>> atlas = load_img(atlas_yeo_2011.thick_7)

Select visual cortex, create a mask and resample it to the right resolution

>>> mask_visual = new_img_like(atlas, atlas.get_data() == 1)
>>> resampled_mask_visual = resample_to_img(
    mask_visual, mask, interpolation="nearest")

> Plot the mask we will use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Plot the mask we  use
```

>>> plotting.plot_roi(resampled_mask_visual, title='Visual regions mask extracted from atlas',
         cut_coords=(8, -80, 9), colorbar=True, cmap='Paired')

.. figure:: ../auto_examples/images/sphx_glr_plot_alignment_methods_benchmark_001.png
   :scale: 30
   :align: left

Define a masker
---------------
>>> from nilearn.input_data import NiftiMasker
>>> roi_masker = NiftiMasker(mask_img=mask).fit()

Prepare the data
-------------------
For each subject, for each task and conditions, our dataset contains two \
independent acquisitions, similar except for one acquisition parameter, the \
encoding phase used that was either Antero-Posterior (AP) or Postero-Anterior (PA).
Although this induces small differences in the final data, we will take \
advantage of these "duplicates" to create a training and a testing set that \

> contains roughly the same signals but acquired totally independently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
contains roughly the same signals but acquired independently.
```

The training fold, used to learn alignment from source subject toward target:
  * source train: AP contrasts for subject one
  * target train: AP contrasts for subject two

>>> source_train = df[df.subject == 'sub-01'][df.acquisition == 'ap'].path.values
>>> target_train = df[df.subject == 'sub-02'][df.acquisition == 'ap'].path.values

The testing fold:

>   * source test: PA contrasts for subject one, used to predict \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * source test: PA contrasts for subject 'sub-01', used to predict \
```

>     the corresponding contrasts of subject two

Reviewer: Same thing here
